not good enough is not a reason to keep
from acting
you got to start somewhere like if you
end up with a 4.0 great
but if you open if you never crack the
book
because you're saying to yourself
whatever i do today is not going to be
good enough that's a self-fulfilling
prophecy
okay so let's get on to the meat and
bones of the training all right
so um
so the first thing that we're going to
try to do is explain a little bit about
how motivation like how we can
understand motivation
so if you look at motivation they're
actually a bunch of different
disciplines that like will talk about
motivation and behavior so for example
there's neuroscience there's psychology
there's even behavioral economics
there's spirituality even like the
system of psychotherapy has its own
tradition about understanding motivation
they're also like these more novel
approaches to motivation so there's like
the self-help section right of like the
bookstore where people are sort of
talking about personal experiences and
motivation and my most most recent
favorite one is like they're all the
life hacks right so you have like in our
society when you look at motivation
there are a lot of different disciplines
and approaches that people will take to
actually like figuring out okay what is
my motivation like how does motivation
work like how do i fix this problem
so then the question becomes okay if
we're coaches and we're here to help
clients sort of fix this problem how are
we going to approach it
and so what we're going to start with as
we do with most things in healthy gamers
we're actually going to start with sort
of the yogic approach and then what
we're going to do is sprinkle in i think
key findings from psychology and
neuroscience
and also some things from like
psychotherapy and stuff you'll find that
a lot of this stuff is actually baked
into
the curriculums that y'all have already
gone through but we're going to kind of
take a step back and think about it so
like i was saying earlier there's no
sanskrit word for motivation because
motivation is actually an umbrella term
so what do y'all think are the
components of motivation like what do
you think determines whether someone is
motivated or not
intrinsic value
what does that mean
when they sort of have
a purpose that they care about that they
can work and commit towards working
okay
so a sense of value
what else what do you think like what
goes into like come on like when y'all
are motivated towards something or not
motivated towards something what goes
into that
let's start with steven
ease of access is a big one like how
likely am i to get that thing okay
what i was going to say desire for the
outcome
desire for the outcome sure right so
there's like outcome orientation there's
like likelihood of success
great
what else like feel about it like your
emotional like sort of attitude towards
it okay your emotional attitude towards
it right so let's say that
all i have to do is go to class and
i'll get the points for attendance right
likelihood of success is very high and
yet
my emotional attitude can keep me from
going to class right
brian what did you say
can you all hear him or is it just me no
no we can't hear oh you can hear me
there you
okay yeah i was saying is um
like
just like
like fulfilling a purpose
or like okay
yeah my analogy is like just like
filling up a hole like that you just dug
over something like that that's how i
am okay great
willingness to suffer
uh what do you mean by that
i mean like what level of tolerance do
you have for going through whatever
adversity you're gonna have to go
through for this goal right so like
the adversity to getting a snack might
be walking up the stairs that's not a
lot of adversity i can go through that
but
maybe to getting a
phd the adversity is years of struggle
and sacrificing having fun so i can
study and
yeah that might be a lot more
so spot on so this is where uh crap my
ipad is pooping out hold on
okay so the first thing that i kind of
want to point out is that um
if we look at motivation y'all are
coming up with like a lot of different
things right there's like what's the
likelihood of success there's like how
you feel about it what the outcome is
how important it is to you um there are
lots of different
attributes that we can kind of think of
when it comes to
like what goes into motivation so this
is the first problem with motivation is
that when people say that they're
unmotivated
they don't know like which of these
things is the problem
you know am i not engaging in the action
because i believe that the likelihood of
success is low so let's take a step back
for a second and imagine that i have an
ahamkar that views me as a failure who
wants to explain real quick for the
people who are streaming what an aham
god is
the ego it's the part of your mind
that's trying to prevent you from you
know incurring any damage just trying to
like
you know sort of ease you into like or
not really ease but it's trying to
protect you from anything that's like
kind of unusual or uncomfortable or like
you know undesirable yep so if i have an
identity or ego as a failure what do you
think that does to my calculation of the
likelihood of success of taking an
action
it's gonna say that you're gonna fail so
so don't do it in the first place
exactly right
so like if we think about this as
coaches like this is kind of interesting
because someone says oh i'm not
motivated to do something
whereas the reason they're not motivated
is because the calculation in their mind
sets the likelihood of success is very
low and therefore it's not worth doing
and so if we think about like this is
kind of tricky because when this client
comes in
and they say i want to
you know i want to i want to find a
romantic partner but i can't because i'm
ugly
like how would you work with that person
as a coach
help them explore where they got the
idea of
how they are ugly and like what is their
perspective on that perfect right so so
like this is and this is the real
challenge that we have as coaches is
that a lot of times what will happen is
that coaches will come in with a
particular goal
but like if they want to find a romantic
partner and then what they'll do is
they'll go to like pick up artists or
like you know whatever to learn
particular skills whereas like that's
the treatment that the the solution that
the client is coming up with is actually
based on like a false formulation of
where their problem is
so instead like by understanding
concepts like a hum car and you sort of
realize like oh the problem is like you
can learn as many pick up skills as you
want to but as long as you are you know
asking someone out and you feel like
you're not worth dating and that you're
a failure that's going to come across as
unattractive become a self-fulfilling
prophecy and then like you know they'll
reject you oh i'm more of a failure and
the next person that you ask out you're
kind of like
like you're kind of like exuding that
like loser musk right and that makes you
like less attractive and then you kind
of fail again and so what we try to do
in coaching is once we understand oh
this is actually a problem of a hum car
where they think going into the
interaction that they're doomed to
failure so once we sort of decompress
that ahamkar we start to ask them hey
where did you get the idea that you're a
failure to begin with once we kind of
sit with them and work with them and as
that identity goes down like what we'll
observe and this is i'm sure you all
have seen this
you know where like you're working with
a client and they seem like super stuck
and you're sitting there week after week
like helping them understand themselves
and then like the next week they just go
and like do what they were supposed to
do you all had that experience before
yeah so everyone's nodding because
people can't see that who here wants to
share an experience not really violating
privacy or anything like that but who
here wants to share an experience about
that with a client like has anyone can
anyone say something like where you
thought you were doing a terrible job it
didn't seem like y'all were getting
anywhere and then all of a sudden
anyone feel like sharing
yeah i'll share what oh go ahead david
um yeah i had a client and i'm going to
talk slow just to make sure that i'm not
sort of violating anything um but i had
a client
um for about 16 weeks um
and we sort of just kept exploring and
understanding and
um sort of there
they kept talking about their goals and
didn't really feel like they were
getting anywhere um
and then you know i i felt like i wasn't
doing anything um they never sort of
reported back any like progress or
anything
and then
i think i think it was before 16 weeks
probably like 12 or 13.
they just sort of had this story of yeah
they went out and did everything that
they had wanted to do
and up until that point i'm like i i'm
like i'm doing nothing i don't know what
i'm doing i like brought the case to
like supervision a bunch um
and then yeah like they just turned
around like oh yeah this has been super
helpful like i have a great
understanding of everything
thanks and it was it was good after that
great yeah so i think that's where it's
it's interesting but even in psychiatry
we have a saying that all boats rise
together
and so i think a big part of what we do
in coaching is helping people like and
people do this in therapy as well i mean
it's like a general observation of
humans that a lot of times you know
there's some fundamental things that
hold us that keep us from like moving
forward in multiple dimensions of our
lives
and so i i think part of the key thing
did somebody else want to share before
we move on
i have a success case if i'm sure go for
it um i had a client who
we spent like maybe like four or five
weeks really trying to get him like
outside of his house he like spent a
whole bunch of time indoors um and like
could never really get there and then
he really wanted to go for a walk down
the street to get some like some
breakfast and one day he did or so like
we had our session he had his week he
had he then later told me that on the
first day he went out and did it
realized it actually wasn't too bad and
like went like another three or four
times and went to the gym twice that
week and like all of a sudden just
crushed all his goals it was really
now he's a crusher
yeah so so i know it sounds kind of
weird but what we're gonna explain to
y'all over the next four days is why
that happens
okay we're gonna start to talk a little
bit about like so we've we've figured
this out so on the back end at hg what
we've done is like done all these
calculations it goes into the way that
y'all like the curriculum that we put
you all through and so y'all are already
doing it and now we're going to kind of
bump you all up to the next level by
teaching you all how that happens and
why that happens so the first thing that
i want to share about motivation is that
it's an emergent property and so what i
mean by that is if we listen to what
y'all are saying y'all are saying okay
there's like emotions involved there's
like likelihood of success involved
there are all these different variables
that go into motivation and the
challenge with like um issues of
motivation is that
when a client feels like they're not
motivated like
what they see is an emergent property
right so what we're gonna see from from
eli's case for example is someone who's
doing all their things from david's case
it's someone who's crushing it on all
levels and then the question kind of
becomes like well
how do i duplicate that so when we look
at so motivation is a term and this is
why i don't think there's a sanskrit
word for motivation
it's a term that is
designed from external observation so if
you look within yourself you won't find
motivation you'll find emotions you'll
find desires you'll find things that you
care about
but motivation is something when i look
at someone who's crushing it on the
outside and i look at them and i make a
judgment from the outside i call them
motivation
so motivation is almost like this
emergent property that people see from
the outside and if you go and you talk
to someone who goes to the gym every day
i know it sounds kind of weird but they
won't say that they're highly motivated
it's not like they get up every day and
are like filled with like passion and
like yeah like i'm gonna go to the gym
it's just like they're like no it's just
kind of like what i do now you know i
just it makes me feel better but there's
sort of this idea of like
of motivation which is built from people
standing on the outside and watching
someone else and saying oh wow that
person must be like intrinsically driven
in some deep and profound way that i
don't feel and the reason that they make
that conclusion is because on the inside
what they feel is something deep and
profound that keeps them stuck
so as we kind of understand motivation
what we're going to try to do is unpack
like what are all of the things that go
into it and as we unpack all of the
different variables of motivation my
hope is that y'all as coaches will be
able to help their clients figure out
like what's the problem here and this is
also why we have a a gigantic motivation
like industry we have tons of
information about motivation and we have
the least motivated generation like in
the history of humanity i don't know if
that's actually factually true or not
that's how it feels
and so it's kind of interesting because
how can we account for sort of like this
discrepancy between all the information
that's out there and how unmotivated
people are and we'll kind of get to that
i think the issue is that
you know when i look at a life hack or i
look at like a success youtuber
they're not going to be able to like
tailor what they say to me right there's
no process of like interaction where we
can figure out okay which advice is
actually the advice that i should follow
so we have people like consuming all
this advice and like not making changes
in their life so the real advantage and
this is where i think this is your duty
as a coach is to understand all these
different dimensions and help a client
figure out okay what are we dealing with
here is this an issue of a hump god is
this an issue among us is this an issue
where like you feel too much emotion or
negative shame is this an issue where
there are people around you who are like
you know preventing you from being your
best self like do you have like you know
your gamer buddies like
messaging you you know at 5 p.m every
day and want you to get on and like play
games with them like how does that
impact your motivation the next day
so as a coach really the key thing here
is that as we teach you this model like
you need to take this model and apply it
to your clients so that you can guide
them in a more specific manner there's
also other advantages to that which
we'll kind of get to
questions about that
okay so kind of the analogy that i'd use
about motivation just to kind of wrap up
is remember i kind of called it an
emergent property and so the thing about
emergent properties is that any
individual component
does not appear to be like irresponsible
for what we see
and just like you know you can look at a
um a uh
just like you can look at
like a bird right and you can look at
the property of flight it's not the
muscle that creates flight it's not the
bone that creates flight it's not the
the wing that creates light and what
happens is we have clients that look
around and they see other birds flying
and they themselves don't see themselves
flying and so then what happens is they
just
end up basically like um
uh
you know they end up trying to figure
out why can't i fly and it's your job as
a coach to basically help them figure
out okay what's what's the part of your
wing that's busted
okay
okay so
um next thing that we're gonna do
is so any questions about that
okay
so now we're gonna get started with goal
setting and motivation
um let me just go ahead and screen share
this with y'all
um
and then
let's see here
give me one second so let's
go to screen share and change
okay
and then
let's go here okay
so our model for goal setting
and motivation is built on a couple of
core concepts okay
the first is that um
not all people are the same
so your job as a coach
is to help people find a customizable
solution to their individual or to their
problems okay
the second thing is that good
good diagnosis
precedes good treatment
and if we look at the efficacy of a
coach
um you know you aren't diagnosing or
treating anything
but
your efficacy as a coach and why we help
clients is because like they're actually
not good diagnosticians they will look
at themselves and they won't actually
accurately diagnose where their
motivational problems are
um
and then the third thing is going to be
a little bit contradictory but while
personalized approaches are important
like a big part of what we do at
healthygamer is that we can rely on
disciplines
to give us framework
frameworks
uh to give frameworks so what we're
gonna do is we're gonna teach all some
things from neuroscience psychology
spirituality and things like that and
the key thing here is that if we kind of
think about okay could and
like couldn't anyone do this and the
answer is yes anyone can do this but
what we're going to do is by giving you
guys these key like takeaways from
different disciplines you'll be able to
help a client faster and to a greater
degree than they would be able to do on
their own because we're going to kind of
give you all the information sure and
anyone out there could go and read about
neuroscience about psychology about
behavioral economics about spirituality
and if they do enough of that self-study
that like they'll be able to figure out
you know what works for them eventually
what we try to do as coaches those we we
have all of the rel not all but you know
we give you guys the most relevant
information and it's your job as a coach
to apply that information when necessary
with your client any questions about
that
okay so now we're gonna have kind of an
interesting uh question so here's the
basic premise under which we're gonna
understand motivation so who knows what
this equation is
anyone know
look familiar
is that
voltage equals current over resistance
very good steven bonus points because my
handwriting is so bad so who here
understands does anyone know what
voltage means
like what is voltage
it's like a measure of electricity right
like how how strong it is
uh it is it is involved in electricity
so this is ohm's law for people who are
curious
okay
so let's let's move on to another
variable what is the i
current okay
so we've got twitch chat helping us out
so ohm's law says basically that voltage
like steven said equals current
over resistance
okay
so if we think about current current is
what we put into the circuit
it's the energy input okay resistance
is like what's resistance
you could you're controlling the amount
of current
it gets
uh yeah so it's kind of it's the
resistance right so it's like what takes
away
uh how can i say this is like what takes
whatever you're trying to do so the
other way we can think about current law
takes away is a terrible definition hold
on let me think about what's a better
definition for this
um
you know it's it's the force that
our current has to act against let's
call it that
uh
before it's a force opposing what we're
trying to do
okay
and then the voltage is sort of the
potential difference and the potential
difference is like where you start and
where you end up so i'll give you all
kind of another analogy let's say i have
a pipe
that is flowing from the second floor
to the first floor
right so the potential difference like
this is a measure of voltage is like the
gravitational potential from here to
here is what causes water to move this
way are we good on that does that make
sense right because that's a
gravitational potential energy so when
you look at something like a battery
that voltage across the battery this may
not be an accurate term but if you look
at like why electrons move from one
point like the cathode to the er sorry
from the anode to the cathode there's an
electrical potential there like a
voltage that causes things to move in a
particular direction so this is where we
start
and this is where we end
okay
and so i'm going to ask you also if we
think about you know how can i get more
water over here what are the different
things that i can do to increase the
water flow that's on this side
put more water in the pipe yep so you
can add more water right so that's
current we can pump more water and what
else can we do
and uh reduce the resistance yep so we
can widen the pipe
right
so resistance in in terms of flow
mechanics is like
the width of the pipe so anyone who's
you know had bubble tea with a bubble
tea straw versus like a tiny little
straw like you get more liquid if the
straw is wider right we can reduce the
resistance
what else can we do
we can put our pipe like this
does that make sense
so we can
activate that gravitational energy like
even better
right we can increase the strength of
the cathode or the anode so i know it
sounds kind of weird but i think this is
a fantastic equation to even understand
psychological resistance
so there's the goal
right and like where you want to go
there's the energy we put in
or the intent
and then there's the resistance
right so these are things like shame
emotions
okay aham god is here too yeah
it's v equals ir
uh
multiplication not division
oh interesting okay
uh yeah so that
tanks particular things but let's stick
with this for now
we can talk about the current instead
yeah so i think it's it's still fine
so just turn resistance into a negative
yeah let me think about that
a bunch of nerds um
let me think about that let me think
about that okay i'll get back to y'all
on that
so let's kind of keep going for now just
because we're in this already um so
so this is where so as we kind of think
about this in terms of like coaching
what we want to do
is actually think about it this way so
when we think about a behavior there's
the intent that people put in
okay
then there's the resistance that they
have to overcome
and then there's the action that they
take towards the end
all right so these are the three
dimensions that we're going to be
exploring and in my experience the
problem that most people have with goal
setting and motivation is that like they
don't understand that all three of these
things can be acted on okay
so
what a lot of people will sometimes do
let's just talk about willpower for a
second
so i think like i think about willpower
is like a limited mana pool
that you can use to kind of like power
through this equation so i can just
expend a certain amount of willpower to
like overcome this resistance hump and
take an action
one time
and then you know i can do that again
and each time that i like sort of drain
my willpower battery oh damn it
what'll happen is like i can take
actions but it's not sustainable so we
see this pattern a lot with students who
are not happy with the kind of um
how can i say this
we see this a lot with students who are
not like happy with being students so
they'll start the semester off with like
a fully charged battery and they'll use
willpower to like study for the first
month
they'll like dig real deep and study for
the first the second month and then like
by the end of it they're like burnt out
and they don't really like enjoy what
they're doing they never enjoyed what
they were doing it was a slog from day
one it's just they were relying on
willpower to get there
so as coaches what we're going to kind
of focus on is understanding intent
resistance and action okay
these are the three major components
so
what do i mean by intent
so so a lot of times people will say
like like i know it sounds kind of weird
but when your clients have a goal like
where does that goal come from
what do you all think
usually like desires like that are
external or like you know uh what's the
word uh in three is right
okay desires from the indireas
good
indriyas are sense organs
what else where else do does when
someone says i have a goal
i want to do something where is that
intent coming from why do they want to
do it
sometimes they it's a desire
what else could it be
could be pressure from like culture
family excellent
okay so i'm gonna call this should
right so like this is something i want
to do that's a desire
this is something i should do
what else
what else can drive someone to action
do people do things that they don't want
to do and that they should
to do and that they shouldn't do
absolutely yes
right so this is where we look at other
things i'm going to kind of call so yeah
okay pressure was fine so i'd say that
we also do things because we're driven
by our values so like what drives what
we want to do our values and our duty
so these are kind of the four things
that i kind of think of when i think
about what goes into intent the other
key thing about uh so when we think
about these four things the goal of this
as a coach is like a lot of times people
don't realize that
the goals they set for themselves aren't
truly their goals and so the ability to
get energy up and engage in those goals
when this is something that i should do
versus something that i actually like
care about so we see this a lot like
with you know second generation indians
is that like everyone wants to be a
doctor
and
very few of us actually want to be
doctors most of us like should be
doctors and there's like societal
pressure to do a particular thing
we also see this a lot with our clients
who um for example like we don't you
know not all of our clients
are
d gens
right so some of our clients are
actually like you know they have jobs
and things like that a lot of our
clients do so sometimes we see this with
clients who
um for example
like they have a job that is very
successful like they're successful but
they feel unfulfilled and how do i like
how do i manage that right because i
should stay in my job because this is a
good job to have
why isn't this
my pen busted
weird okay hold on
um let me just go go to this in a second
so they may have like a particular thing
that they feel like they should do or
it's dumb to not do this thing there we
go
but
what they really care about is something
else what they value is something else
so like i may be a successful programmer
at google but what i care about is like
running d campaigns and telling stories
and so oftentimes what keeps clients
stuck is that their intent is not
clarified so there's a conflict of
intent
and this is why they stay stuck
and so the key thing that we want to do
here as coaches is help them clarify
like okay what is a desire what's
something that you want
what's something that you should do what
do you care about and what are you what
are you duty bound to do what's your
obligation
and it's interesting but just even
having this conversation and helping
people realize that oh this is something
that you should do but it's not
something that you want to do
do you all think once someone
understands that are they more likely or
less likely to engage in the behavior
more likely
why do you say that eli
they're not trying to fight their
emotions anymore they can validate how
they feel about it and it kind of
naturally
like reduces the intensity of that
perfect so this is this i know it's kind
of weird but like i'm going to give you
all like a scenario okay i'm curious i'm
sure you all have heard this from your
clients but okay i need to do x
i can't
do x
therefore
i'm
an idiot
so we see this a lot in people with adhd
i should be able to do x
and then let me ask you something
what do you think this statement
does to their ability to like engage in
action and how does that affect their
motivation
it strengthens the hum car and makes it
harder to act because now your identity
is like you know i suck at doing stuff
so how can i ever do it exactly
so
this is the key thing so another key
thing that we're going to do in terms of
intent we can clarify these intents but
remember that when people are stuck
oftentimes they're ambivalent
right can someone explain what
ambivalence
means about one thing on the fence
what did you say stephen
just thought you were feeling two ways
about one thing yeah feeling two ways
right so this is the other thing so when
when human beings don't engage in a
behavior
right they're
conflicted there's like a pro side and a
con side and one of the biggest
challenges that our clients recognize is
that they never see the con side they're
blind to it so i'll give you all an
example like they say oh i should study
instead of playing games all day
so they don't see like
it's one dimensional for them this is
gonna sound kind of abstract but all
they see is what they should do like
they have their eyes set on the goal and
that's all they're focused on
what they don't see is what they gain by
playing games all day
they don't see the other side of the
equation and so this is what creates
this kind of this mentality over here
this is this is a thought process that's
created from blindness
it's a thought process that people don't
realize that they can't do x for a very
good reason there's something within
them that is keeping them from doing x
right and it's not just that they're
undisciplined it's that they may have
some kind of fear or they have this id
like this this identity which is telling
them and we'll get to this in a second
like an identity that's telling them oh
you're gonna fail so don't bother and
that's the reason that they can't do it
is because there's literally a br a part
of their brain
that is calculating the likelihood of
success so there's a there's a part of
our brain that continually makes a
calculation that is like what is what
are the pros what are the cons what's
the risk what's the benefit or what's
the what's the benefit what's the cost
and what's the likelihood of success
it's sort of like benefit
minus cost
times
likelihood of success
is a calculation that our mind is always
doing
anytime we're like doing anything and
then that sort of results in behavior or
not behavior
and so what people don't recognize is
that there's like actually a benefit to
being unmotivated
so a big part of what we do here in
terms of how we deal with intent we're
going to spend a whole day on this is
we're going to talk about clarifying
desires you know shoulds values and
duties
and when we do this with clients like
they'll be i don't it's like magic
they'll just be like more prone to
um
engage in the right behavior
and it's hard to describe but when you
give human beings
an open-ended or like sort of an honest
assessment of what something will cost
them they're more likely to pay that
cost for the benefit so by clarifying
for people like oh if you stop playing
video games and you start going to class
you're gonna be behind you're gonna feel
behind you're gonna no matter how hard
you study you won't be able to get an a
and if you kind of think about it like
that's devastating for your motivation
and by helping clients understand that
no matter how hard you work now the
highest grade you can get as a b you can
get a hundred percent on every single
test from here on out and the best you
can get as a bee
that crushes people subconsciously it
keeps them from ever engaging in the
behavior but when you make that cost
transparent to them once they really
understand and digest that cost
they are much more likely to engage in
the behavior
and so this kind of hidden cost that
they don't realize is also where their
ambivalence comes from because there's a
subconscious part of their mind that
doesn't want to pay that cost and we
know from from evidence-based
motivational interviewing that
clarifying ambivalence leads people in
the right direction right so there have
been lots of studies we teach all some
motivational interviewing techniques how
you play with that ambivalence and this
is the really interesting thing i had a
really cool case from
uh someone presented a case in case
review where someone had a client who is
doing something incredibly idiotic like
just making terrible decision after
terrible decision after terrible
decision is it related to a particular
relationship
and so the coach like was tearing their
hair out and they're like this is a
terrible idea you just need to go no
contact with this person and cut this
person out of your life and every time
that their client tells
this story to their friends their
friends say the same thing you need to
go no contact with this person go no no
contact with this person this person is
toxic
and then the coach was like i have no
idea how to get my client to see
that this is a terrible relationship
that you're engaging in and you should
go no contact with them
but interestingly enough they resisted
that impulse they didn't play into the
the drama that the client was recruiting
them in because
what do you think happens so
if if your client tells you something
that you think is idiotic and you tell
them it's idiotic how is that going to
affect their behavior are they going to
keep doing it or are they going to
listen to you and stop doing it
they're probably going to double down
absolutely right and that's the key
thing i know it sounds bizarre that's
the key learning from motivational
interviewing
so when you you know when you try to
push someone in a particular direction
in terms of behavior there's a decent
chance that the the if you're kind of
pushing this way
and they're ambivalent about it oh you
need to stop [ __ ] smoking like it's
terrible for me you're gonna die and
like everyone hates it you're so bad at
smoking oh my god like stop the smoking
oh my god what they're gonna do is
they're gonna double down and push back
twice as hard
so this is where reflective listening
and sort of playing with that
ambivalence and even holding the side
of oh it sounds like you know you this
person must mean a lot to you because
it's clear that they're like really
screwing with your life so the
relationship must be really important to
you in some way when you say something
like that like what is the client gonna
say
you guys seen this play out before in
coaching
yeah usually like some amount of
confusion and just like thinking about
it like oh [ __ ] like huh you know that
kind of thing exactly right so when you
kind of say oh like it sounds like this
relationship is really important to you
because they're super toxic and
everyone's telling you to go no contact
with them they must be like super
amazing and then they're like kind of
confused because that's not usually what
they hear and then they start thinking
about it and when they start thinking
about it that's when the change begins
to happen
right it's really interesting
so this is the intent so what we're
going to do is we're going to work with
ambivalence which you guys should be
pretty familiar with we're going to
teach you guys how to clarify your
client's intent
and for some people like this is the
problem like they're just
their intent is confused the next thing
in terms of resistance
so when someone has a clear intent and
they try to engage in a in a um you know
a problem so it's a v equals ir right
oops
so there's resistance over here
and so you know the the greater the
resistance the less likely they are to
engage in um the behavior right
so the two main contributions of
resistance are manas or emotions
and ahamkar or in our ego
okay what do y'all think about that
i mean that's straight facts yeah
that's not a lot to say so we'll go into
more detail you know so we have a whole
day about this
so the other interesting thing is that
resistance manifests
as stuck behaviors
okay
so what this means is like when people
are like watching youtube all day
when they're doing drugs when they're
gaming all day
you know when they're procrastinating
like all these things are like
manifestations of resistance so if you
kind of think about like why do our
clients like watch youtube all day like
what does that do for them
keeps them in the present
absolutely right
what's another way to put it
steven here also mindfulness chad
it just kind of looks like i mean
the youtube and drugs and all that stuff
shuts off a lot of the mundus and active
hum car and things like that absolutely
right so the youtube so the other way to
look at is we can look at neuroscience
articles about on internet addiction
and if we do an fmri study
which is a study of blood flow to the
brain what we can what we discover from
these like various you know articles on
internet addiction is that fmri studies
demonstrate that these activities
shut down negative emotions circuits
so what they're essentially doing is
actually self-medicating against this
crap over here
and oftentimes i'm sure you all
understand this as well like what is
arguing with strangers on the internet
due to your ahamkar
it's like really fun
fantastic it really feeds into it boosts
the ahamka and remember that the ahamkar
becomes active when
what activates the ahamkar what does it
do
it's like a threat that protects you so
if i feel like a failure
and i go argue and school some noob on
the internet how do i feel
you feel good that you're like pumping
yourself up yeah right i'm owning these
noobs
who cares that i'm 28 years old and
living in my mom's basement i'm owning
noobs on the internet i'm on the libs
you know
i'm i'm owning the conservatives i'm a
strong social justice warrior and i do
lots of virtue signaling
signaling or
i i'm owning the libs like it goes
either way like whatever it is it's all
a hum card
and so what people will do is like the
worse they feel about themselves the
more they'll engage with these kinds of
things and this is what's great like so
this is where it gets really devastating
but you know there are platforms like
twitter and youtube and stuff that like
recognize that engaging people involves
like activating their own god
you know so people get pissed off on
twitter so much like why is that it's
because no one can make like a fair or
nuanced argument it's all just
emotionally charged crap that people are
reacting to
right there's no way to have a
discussion over twitter you can have an
argument over twitter
you know like but like
you know i don't know if you all saw the
jimmy from philly interview but like
jimmy from philly interview is
impossible to have over twitter you have
to like actually have a conversation you
can argue with jimmy from philly
you could tell him he's dumb and he can
tell you that you're dumb
that works great so it's kind of
interesting but all of these things that
we see in this generation like we need
to understand these principles and as a
coach it's your job to help them
overcome their resistance
and kind of work through some of these
behaviors and get them in the direction
that they want to go
i would say that resistance is probably
the biggest blind spot for our clients
and this is why oftentimes we'll do
things that clients will be kind of
confused about and they'll say like is
this something i should be talking to
our my therapist about because you're
kind of focusing on negative emotions
and you can absolutely talk to the
therapist about it this is where it
comes back to what the goals are because
what everyone in our community knows is
they know what they need to do
they just don't understand why they
can't do it and why they can't do it so
like i know i have a clear intent i need
to do this thing so it's this part over
here that they're blind to
and so that's what we have to help them
overcome
so the way that we practically are going
to do that is you know we're going to
use like reflective listening and be
compassionate and authentic and all that
good stuff we're going to call them out
on their bs
right when we sort of sniff it out
sometimes but we're gonna do it for the
purpose of growth
and as we kind of explore this stuff
with them as we sort of decompress them
on us as they no longer feel ashamed no
longer feel afraid you know their ego no
longer needs to activate and once their
ego gets out of the way what's left
what's running the show afterward anyone
remember
what's the third part of the mind that
we want to be operating from
intellect
yep
and this is the big problem if you guys
um you know have watched dr k's guide
hopefully people will understand this
concept
but the the big problem is that everyone
thinks that they're they're operating on
intellect all the time but oftentimes
it's a god controlling the internet the
in intellect
and so what happens is they have a lot
of uh
biases right they think that they're
behaving perfectly logically and the
person they're arguing with thinks
they're behaving perfectly logically as
well everyone's perfectly logical
because it's my mind is logical right
i'm not irrational everyone else is
irrational but as long as the ahamkar is
controlling the buddhi the conclusions
of the buddha are going to be incorrect
so this is the problem is that they all
think they're operating well and this is
why it's tricky as a coach but helping
them recognize their blind spots in
terms of emotion is how you're going to
overcome the resistance we'll give you
all more techniques and more details on
that
later
and this is also what's kind of
frustrating for a lot of a lot of our
clients is when they have resistance
it's kind of like a blocked pipe and so
then what they do is they're pumping
more stuff into this end right
and like this is what leads to burnout
and frustration
because they're kind of focusing on like
building up motivation and dumping
energy into the system and they dump
more energy and they dump more energy
and more energy whereas all it really
takes is an elegant solution of reducing
this resistance clearing that blockage
and then suddenly the amount of energy
they need to put in the system is
actually less and they get more output
and this is where if we go back to the
cases that we heard earlier people were
like it wasn't they weren't doing
anything they weren't doing anything
they weren't doing and suddenly they're
crushing all their goals like how the
[ __ ] does that work it's because y'all
are removing that resistance in the
middle and then suddenly they it starts
flowing and it feels natural and this is
the thing because when people think
about motivation they think like oh my
god it's like i have to like work really
hard uh no true motivation is like feels
very natural it actually feels
effortless and that's what we want to
shoot for with our clients
okay
um another thing that i should mention
so oftentimes this resistance is also a
sum scott
i guess that goes without saying with
y'all but you know just for the sake of
completeness
and then we get to the third dimension
which is action
so this is probably the area healthy
gamer that we've been the least
supportive of y'all with
we really could have done a better job
and that's actually the main thing
around this um
uh you know this training is a big part
of that so at the end of the day
setting the right kind of goals is like
really really important for our clients
so we've got a couple of steps here
first is understand the person
so i'm going to ask you all a couple of
questions
how do your clients decide what goal to
pick
where do their goals come from
when they want to change them
okay should do go ahead ken
when they want to change something about
themselves but how do they know that
that's something that they should change
or in what way they're going to change
it
they look around a lot and see
other people doing stuff or being things
all right so what what games y'all play
games
what do y'all play
league
okay league noob okay
so like you know this is kind of
interesting because but like
so what you know if i i let's say i
watch a video on league and i see some
pro player like owning with this hero or
champion right and then i'm like oh like
if i want to own games
and climb and gain gain mmr like i need
to play that hero how effective is that
is a strategy to like win at league
terrible
why
but your character choice isn't why
you're winning or
losing but no pax dude i saw this guy he
was crushing with his hero
yeah well maybe if you were more of a
sigma male you would have like won with
that character
okay
right so it's interesting so like this
happens all the time in dota 2 where
like you know you'll look at what other
people are owning with and you're like
oh like i just happens all the time so i
don't know if you guys have had this
experience where you get owned by a
particular hero in a game and it's like
next like that's so easy it's so broken
oh my god it's so op in the next game
when you queue up you're like i'm gonna
pick that op hero it's gonna be an easy
win it's so broken what happens
you get crushed
absolutely right so i want you all to
think about this because this is this is
legit okay
that's literally how our community picks
their goals they look at some random ass
person and they say look at what that
person did to be successful let me just
mimic what they did and then i will be
successful and then they get crushed
because steven's spot on they look
around for their goals
okay one of my first coaching clients
ever
got out of jail
and i was like
he's like i need to find a job and i was
like how are you like what kind of job
do you want and he's like well
i have a buddy who works at a car wash
so i guess i'll work there and it's like
hold on a second bro take a big step
back
you know you've got two weeks of like
stuff where you have to find a job
before you start working at the car wash
let's think about like what all of your
options are so after talking to him for
a long time and like working through
stuff he started to get a job at a car
wash but he also like started getting
into emt training became an emt started
working as an emt for a while then like
went into the med tech field and then is
now like a
like a medical device rep or something
like that
but most of what where our clients goals
come from is just like what they see
other people doing oh it worked for this
person
it worked for you know reading one book
a day is how this person made a million
dollars so i'm going to start reading
one book a day
so the first thing that we want to do in
terms of setting the right at the right
goals is understand the person and a lot
of times like they don't do this step
right they focus on they look outside of
themselves to try to figure out what the
right goal is this can be very
frustrating for our clients because
they're coming the first week and
they'll be like how do i fix my life
give me the plan
but we can't give them the plan yet we
have to understand who they are first
then we can worry about the plan okay
so
um
you know understand the person the
second thing is set appropriate goals
and there are a couple of techniques
here that we're going to teach all
right so so it's not going to be you set
the goal for them it's the two y'all are
going to like work together to set the
right goal and then you know you're
going to develop an action plan
they're going to try it and when they
try what's going to happen
they going to do it
they're going to fail
they're going to fail excellent then
what's your job as a coach
provide compassion through their trial
and error
excellent
because here's the big thing
right so when i when i set a goal for
myself and i fail like that creates all
the crap
mana sahamkar all that sort of stuff so
as a coach we're going to help them pick
pick themselves up off the ground dust
themselves off and try again right so
we're going to provide emotional support
and we're also going to provide feedback
so we're going to be a lens because in
that mindset like it's hard to be
objective right so we're going to be
objective for them and we're going to
try to figure things out and then
essentially
our you know
our goal setting and like accountability
uh you know approach as coaches is
iterative
who knows what this word means
means you have to iterate which means
each time something goes wrong you
change one thing and you keep doing that
until you find something that works yep
perfect right
so we want to set appropriate so as a
goal we want to set uh as coaches we
want to set appropriate goals
these goals should
factor in
strengths and weaknesses
of the client
right
next thing that we need to do
support them when they screw up
and then fourth thing is iterate
how can we okay how can we do it better
next time
and so in my experience when y'all do
this
okay when you clarify intent when you
work with their resistance when you set
appropriate goals
this is how you help someone change
their life
questions
yeah i had one question about the um
you said your first client you know he
got out of jail and then you know he was
like okay i should start working at the
car wash because my friend is there the
way you told the story it sounds like
you know you kind of immediately kind of
like he said that and then you were like
well hang on like let's think about this
um
i don't know if that's how it actually
panned out or if that was just like the
summary version because you know my
understanding is like sometimes like you
know it kind of depends on where you're
at with like the relationship sometimes
like
putting the brakes on something
you know like those that kind of
assumption is like
you know you kind of have to like let it
ride for a little bit first before you
can like actually explore alternatives
but it sounds like the way you told it
was like you went straight to there
yeah so i'll tell you what i did i think
you all would handle this
you all would have done the same
basically um so i basically asked him
help me understand
or let me ask you so if your client
let's see if y'all's
i'll just say so i asked him like help
me understand like how you came to the
conclusion to work at the car wash
right
and then i asked like you know simple
open-ended questions that made him
realize that he had like huge errors in
his thought process and catalyzed change
which is what else did you consider
and he was like
i didn't consider anything else that's
not what he said he's like i don't know
right so like people don't so this is
the big problem this is why y'all are
useful to be blunt is because people
don't they're blind to their own blind
spots
right that's the biggest problem so if
we think about like why people stay
stuck like human beings are smart
especially our community
like if they understand a problem
correctly they will fix it themselves so
by definition the problems that people
get stuck on are the ones that are
misdiagnosed this is a concept that
started with carl jung and he kind of
said like everyone has a shadow and the
most growth that a human being can have
is in looking at the shadow because the
shadow is the part of yourself that by
definition you neglect to look at
and so like most of the things like if
there's one part of the world that's
like forbidden
that's where there's the most
opportunity for discovery
does that make sense facts
oh for sure
right so so like in terms of how i
worked with this person so i asked him
like what else did you consider and he's
like
what
that's not how he operates right he
doesn't like he doesn't think about
approaching his life in a systematic way
he just kind of like does what he sees
other people doing which is how most of
us do it
it's how our brain let's monkey see
monkey do right that's how like you
think about how you learn slang
like how does that happen there's no
intent
there are like circuits in your brain
that are literally designed
to adjust your behavior based on what
you see and shape your behavior
i don't know if you all have ever like
lived in a different country where there
was like a social custom that like
people there didn't do
so for me it's like shaking hands
it's like i went to india and i'd like
shake people's hands and they were like
confused
because they don't do that there and
after a while i kind of stopped
right so i just like and so there's like
literally a part of my brain that's like
constantly adjusting how i
view situations
and then over time i started asking
questions like what do you care about
you know like do you are you passionate
about car washes like do you want to be
an entrepreneur do you want to open up
your own car wash one day he's like no
and he's like what he cared about was
excitement so his options were like join
the military or like do something else
that's exciting
so i would ask him like what do you find
exciting he's like i think combat would
be cool
i was like okay what else
and he's like well like
maybe like being a police officer
and like we kind of stumbled on empty
and i was like okay like maybe if you
want to you know go into combat
maybe emt training would be helpful and
he hated school like he hates he hated
emt training but he was totally fine
doing gave it 100 because like oh
like this is going to be useful for me
even though i detest doing it going to
school for the purpose
of like it's good for me is not a good
motivator
even doing school that you detest doing
because he wants to live an exciting
life he doesn't want to sit in a
classroom somewhere and telling him hey
if you like wind up in combat somewhere
maybe it'll be useful to get emt skills
and he's like yeah i can get behind that
and then he's motivated
right and then you do like further work
with him you ask him you know why are
you craving excitement things like that
you kind of get deeper and deeper and
then eventually he ends up with one of
the most boring jobs in the universe or
maybe it's exciting i don't know
he's a medical device rep
he likes his job he's happy
has the added benefit of you know lower
chance of casualty
other questions
yeah i'm curious where like focus or
attention comes into play like
motivation or like the intent resistance
action
the focusing of attention
yeah like focus attention stuff like
that
so we'll get into that so there's stuff
um that there's a lot of stuff that has
to do with motivation which is a little
bit outside the scope of coaching but
when we think about that intent so focus
is there is what i would put on the
intent side so if we think about like if
check out i don't know if you all have
watched if you all watch the video on
daruna the origin of motivation and dr
k's guide
you'll gone through that
yep
so
you know there's a lot of stuff there
but basically if we think about how do
you sustain motivation i recognize that
we just sort of said motivation isn't
one thing but i'd say that
focusing your attention is like the
major way of doing it and where does
attention
fit into that graph it fits into the
intention side it's the energy that you
put in so the more focused your mind is
the more like cognitive energy you can
leverage into a particular thing
wouldn't it also come into play into
action to keep yourself like focused on
what you're doing
yes you could definitely put it there
um
that has probably more to do with the
way that i'm defining action which is
like around appropriate goal setting
and adjusting expectations and things
like that so it's absolutely a part of
like physically what they have to do yes
absolutely but in terms of and so this
is what's a little bit different about
talking about motivation in general and
talking about it as a coach
so what we're doing here is trying to
help you
figure out how can you like essentially
like increase you know the gravity of
their situation so that
the the potential difference between
where they want to go and where they are
where they are and where they want to go
is like easy for them that's your goal
as a coach
right so an example of that is you know
you all know the the you know the half
of half rule in terms of goal setting
you guys have picked this up yet
so in terms of goal setting what we
recommend is think about where you are
think about where you want to go cut
that in half and then cut that in half
again that should be your first target
so that's something that the parent
program
was very successful because of like that
principle because all these parents like
have this idea that they want they want
to transform their kids into like you
know 4.0 valedictorians who are playing
sports and you know
learning a musical instrument just like
ain't going to happen
you got to like adjust your expectations
and start small
and then like over time like it's
interesting because we can get 100 of
the way there like it's absolutely
possible
we just want to start in a particular
way as a coach you want to help your
client set a goal for themselves that
they can achieve and then like build on
that success
and then the challenge we'll get to this
in the goal setting but
the challenge with that is that they're
going to say like what is a client going
to say if they say oh i want to like i
need to like you know get a 4.0 and you
tell them like why don't you start with
a 2.0 what's their resistance going to
be that's not good enough exactly right
so that's where you do the work as a
coach of helping them let go of that
idea
like not good enough is not a reason to
keep from acting
you got to start somewhere like if you
end up with a 4.0 great
but if you open if you never crack the
book
because you're saying to yourself
whatever i do today is not going to be
good enough that's a self-fulfilling
prophecy which is why they believe it in
the first place
because what they've tried in the past
has not been enough
so you got to get underneath that and
like help them dismantle the idea of
like not good enough it's not a thing
there's only action
you